Explanation/development process (#62)
canonical/ubuntu-packaging-guide: docs/explanation/development-process.rst

development as well as design, writing, and community leadership with a wide
range of technical skill levels.

The :term:`Canonical` teams meet after every release at the Roadmap Planning 
Sprint to plan the roadmap for the next release and discuss how to implement
the roadmap at the Engineering Sprint.

Merging with Upstream & feature development
-------------------------------------------

The first phase of the release cycle is characterised by bringing new releases
of :term:`upstream` components into Ubuntu, either directly or via 
:doc:`Merges and Syncs from Debian </explanation/debian-merges-and-syncs>`. 
Development of planned projects for the release often begins while merging is
still underway, and their development is accelerated once the package archive
is reasonably consistent and usable.

The automatic import of new package versions from Debian ends at the 
:ref:`DebianImportFreeze`.

Stabilisation and deadlines (freezes)
-------------------------------------

During development, caution is increasingly exercised in making changes
to Ubuntu to ensure a stable state is reached in time for the final release

> date. The typical order and length of the various freezes can be seen on the

Author: > It's not quite clear what the definition of a freeze is here. I think we could be a bit more explicit about what we mean by "freeze", to avoid using the term without making it really clear what the term means.

_Originally posted by @s-makin in https://github.com/canonical/ubuntu-packaging-guide/pull/54#discussion_r1624269513_

> During development, caution is increasingly exercised in making changes
> to Ubuntu to ensure a stable state is reached in time for the final release
> date. The typical order and length of the various freezes can be seen on the
> current Release Schedule, which is usually posted as a Discourse article under
> the `"Release" topic <https://discourse.ubuntu.com/c/release/>`_. 
> 
> .. note::
>     In the past, the Release Schedule was published in the Ubuntu Wiki.
>     See for example the `release schedule of Ubuntu 20.04 LTS (FocalFossa) <https://wiki.ubuntu.com/FocalFossa/ReleaseSchedule>`_.
> 
> During freezes, exceptions must be requested to approve changes.
> See :doc:`how to request a freeze exception </how-to/request-freeze-exception>`.

Author: @s-makin what do you think about:

```suggestion
During development, caution is increasingly exercised in making changes
to Ubuntu to ensure a stable state is reached in time for the final release
date. Modifications to the Ubuntu package archive get incrementaly restricted,
effectively freezing the state of the Ubuntu package archive. The
deadlines when these restrictions get enabled are called "freezes". During
freezes, exceptions must be requested to approve changes. See 
:doc:`how to request a freeze exception </how-to/request-freeze-exception>`.
The typical order and length of the various freezes can be seen on the
current Release Schedule, which is usually posted as a Discourse article under
the `"Release" topic <https://discourse.ubuntu.com/c/release/>`_. 

.. note::
    In the past, the Release Schedule was published in the Ubuntu Wiki.
    See for example the `release schedule of Ubuntu 20.04 LTS (Focal Fossa) <https://wiki.ubuntu.com/FocalFossa/ReleaseSchedule>`_.
```

**Edit:** just noticed that there is a space missing in "FocalFossa"

Reviewer: I think this is great, much clearer!

Author: Thanks, committed with https://github.com/canonical/ubuntu-packaging-guide/pull/62/commits/6425645543a860e8f087b99eeae60b1370c11540

Ubuntu development process
==========================

Each release cycle follows the same general pattern, with the following
major phases. Ubuntu contributors are expected to follow this process closely
to ensure that their work is aligned with that of others. Because of the
time-based release cycle, Ubuntu contributors must coordinate well to
produce an on-time release.

> See also the article, :doc:`/explanation/releases`, for more details about the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
See also the article :doc:`/explanation/releases` for more details about the
```

The Ubuntu infrastructure is prepared for a new development branch at the
beginning of each cycle. The package build system is set up, the toolchain
is organised, :term:`seeds <Seeds>` are branched, and many other pieces are made
ready before development can properly begin. Once these preparations are made,
the new branch is officially announced on the
`ubuntu-devel-announce mailing list <https://lists.ubuntu.com/mailman/listinfo/ubuntu-devel-announce>`_ 
and opened for uploads to the :doc:`/explanation/archive`.

.. note::
    See the `Ubuntu 24.04 LTS (Noble Numbat) archive opening announcement email <https://lists.ubuntu.com/archives/ubuntu-devel-announce/2023-October/001341.html>`_
    as an example.

Planning
--------

Ubuntu contributors discuss the targeted features for each release cycle via
the various channels (e.g., IRC, Matrix, Discourse, Launchpad). Some of these
come from strategic priorities for the distribution as a whole, and some are
proposed by individual developers.

The broader open-source community gets together at the :term:`Ubuntu Summit` 
(similar but different to the past 
:term:`Ubuntu Developer Summits <Ubuntu Developer Summit>`) to share

> experiences and ideas and to inspire future exciting projects covering

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
experiences and ideas and to inspire future projects covering
```

development as well as design, writing, and community leadership with a wide
range of technical skill levels.

The :term:`Canonical` teams meet after every release at the Roadmap Planning 
Sprint to plan the roadmap for the next release and discuss how to implement

> the roadmap at the Engineering Sprint.

Reviewer 2: This is internal process info, and as such I think it shouldn't be included. While not a secret, it suggests there are parts of the devel process that community is excluded from (nothing wrong about the fact itself -- we just don't need to advertise it).
```suggestion
```

> Merging with Upstream & feature development

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Merging with upstream and feature development
```

-------------------------------------------

The first phase of the release cycle is characterised by bringing new releases
of :term:`upstream` components into Ubuntu, either directly or via 

> :doc:`Merges and Syncs from Debian </explanation/debian-merges-and-syncs>`. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
:doc:`Merges and syncs from Debian </explanation/debian-merges-and-syncs>`. 
```

> Development of planned projects for the release often begins while merging is

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The development of planned projects for the release often begins while merging is
```

> still underway, and their development is accelerated once the package archive

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
still underway, and the development accelerates once the package archive
```

is reasonably consistent and usable.

The automatic import of new package versions from Debian ends at the 
:ref:`DebianImportFreeze`.

Stabilisation and deadlines (freezes)

> -------------------------------------

Reviewer 2: Unless it's a required term, I suggest using 'milestones' instead of the slightly morbid deadlines.
```suggestion
Stabilisation and milestones (freezes)
--------------------------------------
```

During development, caution is increasingly exercised in making changes
to Ubuntu to ensure a stable state is reached in time for the final release

> date. Modifications to the Ubuntu package archive get incrementally restricted,

Reviewer 2: Can we specify _who_ does the restricting here? It would both make the information more complete and also allow us to avoid the use of the passive voice.

effectively freezing the state of the Ubuntu package archive. The

> deadlines when these restrictions get enabled are called "freezes". During

Reviewer 2: Same ^

> freezes, exceptions must be requested to approve changes. See 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
freezes, developers must request exceptions to approve changes. See 
```

:doc:`how to request a freeze exception </how-to/request-freeze-exception>`.
The typical order and length of the various freezes can be seen on the
current Release Schedule, which is usually posted as a Discourse article under

> the `"Release" topic <https://discourse.ubuntu.com/c/release/>`_.

Reviewer 2: Just trying to reshuffle it to eliminate passive.
```suggestion
The release team usually posts the current Release Schedule as a Discourse article
under the `"Release" topic <https://discourse.ubuntu.com/c/release/>`_. It shows the typical order and length of the various freezes.
```

.. note::
    In the past, the Release Schedule was published in the Ubuntu Wiki.

>     See for example the `release schedule of Ubuntu 20.04 LTS (Focal Fossa) <https://wiki.ubuntu.com/FocalFossa/ReleaseSchedule>`_.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    See, for example, the `release schedule of Ubuntu 20.04 LTS (Focal Fossa) <https://wiki.ubuntu.com/FocalFossa/ReleaseSchedule>`_.
```

.. _TestingWeeks:

Testing weeks
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> During a release's development phase, testing weeks are organised to focus the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
During the release development phase, developers organise testing weeks to focus the
```

Ubuntu community's efforts on testing Ubuntu's latest daily
:term:`ISO images <Image>` and its :term:`flavours <Ubuntu flavours>`. These
weeks are crucial for discovering bugs and getting early feedback about new
features.

.. note::
    The testing weeks replaced the older practice of alpha and beta milestones.
    For example, Ubuntu 14.04 LTS (Trusty Tahr) had Alpha 1, Alpha 2, Beta 1,
    and Beta 2 milestones.

    See `the email <https://lists.ubuntu.com/archives/ubuntu-release/2018-April/004434.html>`_
    that announced the process change.

.. _DebianImportFreeze:

Debian Import Freeze
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The automatic import of new packages and versions of existing packages from

> Debian gets disabled. The import of a new package or version of an existing

Reviewer 2: Again, who does the disabling, please?

Author: Archive admins disable the automatic import of changes from Debian

package from Debian has to be requested. 

.. note::

    The general development activity is still unrestricted until the
    Feature Freeze; however, the Feature Freeze is often scheduled for the same
    day.

.. _FeatureFreeze:

Feature Freeze (FF)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

At this point, Ubuntu developers should stop introducing new features,

> packages, and :term:`API`/:term:`ABI` changes, and instead concentrate on

Reviewer 2: Just curious: prior to this, there are no restrictions on ABI changes?

Author: No (based on the documentation I have read and the changes I have experienced).

Prior FF, it is effectively the wild west in the archive and also the reason why major disruptive archive event are announced in the release schedule (see e.g. https://discourse.ubuntu.com/t/oracular-oriole-release-schedule/36460)

If a change breaks reverse dependencies, this has to be addressed before the final release by patching the issue, rebuilding with the new dependencies or removing the reverse dependency (just a component or an entire package); also known as "proposed-migration" and "+1 Maintenance".

fixing bugs in the current release in development.

.. _User Interface Freeze:

User Interface Freeze (UIF)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The user interface should be finalised to allow documentation writers and
translators to work on a consistent target that doesn't render screenshots or
documentation obsolete.

After the user interface freeze, the following things are not allowed to change
without a freeze exception:

* the user interface of individual applications that are installed by default,
* the appearance of the desktop,
* the distribution-specific artwork,
* all user-visible strings in the desktop and applications that are installed 

>   by default.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* User interface of individual applications that are installed by default
* Appearance of the desktop
* Distribution-specific artwork
* All user-visible strings in the desktop and applications that are installed 
by default
```

.. _DocumentationStringFreeze:

Documentation String Freeze
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Documentation strings should no longer be created or modified. This freeze
ensures that the documentation can be accurately translated.

> Exceptions to this rule may be considered before release for significant and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Exceptions to this rule may be considered before the release for significant and
```

> glaring typographical errors or exceptional circumstances.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
glaring errors or exceptional circumstances.
```

.. _KernelFeatureFreeze:

Kernel Feature Freeze
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The :term:`kernel` feature development should end at this point, and the
kernels can be considered feature-complete for the release. From now on, only
bugfix changes are expected.

.. note::
    The Kernel Feature Freeze occurs after the :ref:`FeatureFreeze` because
    the Linux Kernel is typically released upstream after the Feature Freeze.
    Additionally, the Kernel Feature Freeze is deliberately scheduled so that
    the Beta images have a fully featured kernel suitable for testing. 

.. _HardwareEnablementFreeze:

Hardware Enablement Freeze
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

All new hardware enablement tasks for devices targeting the given release
should be finished, and all the respective packages should be in the Ubuntu

> package archive. The release team will no longer accept changes in the Ubuntu

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
package archive. The release team no longer accepts changes in the Ubuntu
```

package archive related to supporting new image types or platforms.
This freeze ensures that any new platforms are already available for testing
of the beta images and in the weeks leading to the :ref:`FinalFreeze`.

.. note::
    The Hardware Enablement Freeze is usually scheduled for the same day as
    the Beta Freeze.

.. _BetaFreeze:

Beta Freeze
~~~~~~~~~~~

> For the beta release's preparation, all uploads are queued and subject to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For the beta release preparation, all uploads are queued and subject to
```

manual approval by the release team. Changes to packages that affect beta
release images (flavours included) require the release team's approval before

> uploading. Uploads for packages that do not affect images will generally be

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
uploading. Uploads for packages that do not affect images are generally
```

accepted as time permits.

.. tip::
    You can use the :manpage:`seeded-in-ubuntu(1)` tool, provided by the
    ``ubuntu-dev-tools`` package, to list all the current daily images
    containing a specified package or to determine whether the specified
    package is part of the supported seed. 
    
    If the list output is empty, uploading it during a freeze should be
    safe.

The freeze allows Archive Admins to fix package inconsistencies or critical
bugs quickly and in an isolated manner. Once the beta release is shipped, the 
Beta Freeze restrictions no longer apply.

.. _KernelFreeze:

Kernel Freeze
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> The Kernel Freeze is a deadline for kernel updates since they require several

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Kernel Freeze is the final date for kernel updates because they require several
```

lockstep actions that must be folded into the image-building process.

Exceptional circumstances may justify exemptions to the freeze at the
discretion of the release managers.

.. _NonLanguagePackTranslationDeadline:

> Non-language-pack translation deadline
> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Non-language-pack translation final date
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
```

Author: issue: @rkratky this is the wording used in the release schedule (e.g. https://discourse.ubuntu.com/t/noble-numbat-release-schedule/35649), I think that it is confusing if we use a different name

Author: I will set this thread for now as resolved to unblock this PR from merging. In exchange I  opened #73.

Some translation data cannot currently be updated via the language pack
mechanism. Because these items require more disruptive integration work,
they are subject to an earlier deadline to give time to developers to manually
export translations from Launchpad and integrate them into the package.

> This deadline marks the date after which translations for such packages are not

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This marks the date after which translations for such packages are not
```

guaranteed to be included in the final release. Depending on the package and
its maintainers workflow, they may be exported later.

Other packages can still be translated until the
:ref:`LanguagePackTranslationDeadline`.

.. _FinalFreeze:

Final Freeze
~~~~~~~~~~~~

This freeze marks an **extremely** high-caution period until the
:ref:`FinalRelease`. Only bug fixes for release-critical, security-critical or
otherwise exceptional circumstantial bugs are included in the Final Release,
which the release team and relevant section teams must confirm.

Unseeded packages
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Packages in :ref:`ArchiveComponents_Universe` that aren't seeded in any of the

> Ubuntu flavours just remain in :ref:`FeatureFreeze` because they do not affect

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Ubuntu flavours remain in :ref:`FeatureFreeze` because they do not affect
```

the release; however, when the Ubuntu package archive is frozen, fixes must be
manually reviewed and accepted by the release team members.

When the Final Release is close (~1.5 days out), developers should consider
uploading to the :ref:`proposed pocket <ArchivePockets_Proposed>`, from which

> the release team will cherry-pick into the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the release team cherry-picks into the
```

:ref:`release pocket <ArchivePockets_Release>` if circumstances allow.
All packages uploaded to the proposed pocket that do not make it into the

> release pocket until the Final Release will become candidates for

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
release pocket until the Final Release become candidates for
```

:ref:`StableReleaseUpdates_Summary`. Therefore, uploads to the proposed pocket
during Final Freeze should meet the requirements of Stable Release Updates if
the upload is not accepted into the release pocket. In particular, the upload

> must reference at least one bug, which will be used to track the stable update. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
must reference at least one bug, which is used to track the stable update. 
```

If you are sure that your upload will be accepted during Final Freeze, you can
upload directly to the release pocket, but be aware that you have to re-upload

> after Final Release if the upload gets rejected.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. note::
    If you are sure that your upload will be accepted during Final Freeze, you can
    upload directly to the release pocket, but be aware that you have to re-upload
    after Final Release if the upload gets rejected.
```

.. _ReleaseCandidate:

Release Candidate
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The images produced during the week before the :ref:`FinalRelease` are
considered "release candidates". In an ideal world, the first release candidate
would end up being the Final Release; however, we don't live in a perfect
world, and this week is used to get rid of the last release-critical bugs and
do as much testing as possible. Until the Final Release, changes are only
permitted at the release team's discretion and will only be allowed for
high-priority bugs that might justify delaying the release.

.. _LanguagePackTranslationDeadline:

> Language pack translation deadline
> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Language pack translation last day
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
```

Author: note: I agree that the word `deadline` should be avoided for obvious reasons, but it is the term that was and is used in Ubuntu release schedules (see for example the [Oracular Oriole Release Schedule](https://discourse.ubuntu.com/t/oracular-oriole-release-schedule/36460) or [Language Pack Translation Deadline (Ubuntu Wiki)](https://wiki.ubuntu.com/LanguagePackTranslationDeadline)).

thought: Maybe it is worth having a discussion with the release team to change the used terminology.

Reviewer 2: Thanks for the context. Please, consider the deadline-related suggestion non-blocking.

Translations done up until this date will be included in the final release's
language packs. 

Finalisation
------------

As the final release approaches, the focus narrows to fixing "showstopper"
bugs and thoroughly validating the installation images. Every image is tested
to ensure that the installation methods work as advertised. Low-impact bugs
and other issues are deprioritised to focus developers on this effort.

This phase is vital, as severe bugs that affect the experience of booting
or installing the images must be fixed before the final release.
In contrast, ordinary bugs affecting the installed system can be fixed with
Stable Release Updates.

.. _FinalRelease:

Final Release
-------------

> Once the :ref:`ReleaseCandidate` ISO is declared stable, it will be announced on the 
> `ubuntu-announce mailing list <https://lists.ubuntu.com/archives/ubuntu-announce/>`_
> and referred to as the "Final Release".

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once the release team declares the :ref:`ReleaseCandidate` ISO stable and names it
the "Final Release", a representative of the team announces it on the 
`ubuntu-announce mailing list <https://lists.ubuntu.com/archives/ubuntu-announce/>`_.
```

.. note::

>     See for example the `Ubuntu 24.04 LTS (Noble Numbat) release announcement <https://lists.ubuntu.com/archives/ubuntu-announce/2024-April/000301.html>`_.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    See, for example, the `Ubuntu 24.04 LTS (Noble Numbat) release announcement <https://lists.ubuntu.com/archives/ubuntu-announce/2024-April/000301.html>`_.
```
